.\" 
.\" $Id:$
.\"
.TH PQ2 1 "Version 5" "ROOT" 
.\" NAME should be all caps, SECTION should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parms are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.SH NAME
pq2 \- The command line interface to a dataset meta-repository based on ROOT files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pq2
action
.I "options"
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
This manual page documents briefly the
.BR pq2
program.
.PP
.B pq2
is a
.B ROOT
application providing an interface to a dataset meta-repository based on ROOT files;
the repository can be accessed via the local file
system or a remote file server daemon or a PROOF facility.
.PP
When working with a local or remote file system, \fIpq2\fR instantiates a \fITDataSetManagerFile\fR class
on the specified local or remote directory. Remote access is done via the \fITFile\fR interface, so any
implementation of \fITFile\fR supported by the installation can in principle be used.
When working with PROOF server the \fITProof\fR dataset manager interface is used to access the dataset
repository attached to the PROOF cluster.
.SH ACTIONS
.TP
ls
list compact information about all or a sample dataset.
.TP
ls-files
list compact information about all the files of a given dataset.
.TP
ls-files-server
list the file content of a dataset on a given server or list of servers.
.TP
info-server
display compact information about the datasets on a given server or a set of servers.
.TP
ana-dist
analyse the file distribution of a dataset (or a set of datasets) over the file
servers, either in terms of files or of file sizes. The output is a text file with
the the file movements needed to make the file distribution even in the chosen
metrics to be used in input to pq2-redistribute.
Optionally the internal objects can be saved so that they can be used as starting
point for a subsequent run. Also an histogram and a plot can be saved to visualize
the file distribution.
.TP
put
register one or more datasets.
.TP
rm
remove one or more datasets.
.TP
verify
scan the content one or more datasets.
.TP
cache
display or clear the local cache content.

.SH COMMON OPTIONS
Some of the options listed below have a slight different meaning
depending on the action. Please refer to the man pages of the script interfaces to the actions for more
details (see below).
.TP
\fB-d\fR <\fIdataset\fR>
For all action but \fIput\fR, the dataset to be processed. For listing actions the wildcards '*' is supported.
For action \fIput\fR, \fIdataset\fR is the path to the file with the list of files in the dataset or
directory with the files containing the file lists of the datasets to be registered; in the first case wildcards '*'
can be specified in the file name, i.e. '<dir>/fil*' is ok but '<dir>/*/file' is not.
In all cases the name of the dataset is the name of the file finally used.
.TP
\fB-u\fR <\fIserverurl\fR>
URL of the PROOF master or data server providing the information; for data servers, it must include the directory.
Can also be specified via the environment variables PQ2PROOFURL or PQ2DSSRVURL (see ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES)."
.TP
\fB-o\fR <\fIoptions\fR>
Specify a string of options to be passed to the instance actuatlly performing the action; the exact meaning is action
dependent.
.TP 
\fB-s\fR <\fIservers\fR>
Specify a server or a comma-separated list of servers to be used in the analysis when required by the action.
.TP 
\fB-k\fR
Keep the temporary files created during the analysis under $TMPDIR
.TP 
\fB-v\fR
Verbose mode
.SH OPTIONS for action verify
The options listed below apply only to action 'verify'
.TP
\fB-r\fR <\fIredirector\fR>
Force re-location of the files via the specified redirector; useful after a file redistribution on the same file
server.
.TP
\fB-f\fR <\fIresult file\fR>
Defines the file where to save the result of the analysis; by the default the result is send to the screen.
The output contains one line per each file that needs to be moved with the format 'file source destination' where
'file' is the file name, 'source' is the source server URL and 'destination' is the destination server URL.
.SH OPTIONS for action ana-dist
The options listed below apply only to action 'ana-dist'
.TP
\fB-m\fR <\fImetrics\fR>
Defines the metrics to be used in the distribution analysis. The possibilities supported currently are: 'F' to use
the number of files, and 'S' to use the file size.
.TP
\fB-f\fR <\fIresult file\fR>
Defines the file where to save the result of the analysis; by the default the result is send to the screen.
The output contains one line per each file that needs to be moved with the format 'file source destination' where
'file' is the file name, 'source' is the source server URL and 'destination' is the destination server URL.
.TP 
\fB--outfile\fR <\fIoutput file\fR>
Defines the file where to save the output of the analysis in binary form (ROOT file); this output can be used as starting
point for a next run, allowing to run over many datasets in separate steps.
.TP 
\fB--infile\fR <\fIinput file\fR>
Defines the ROOT file from where to fetch the output of a previous run (saved with --outfile).
.TP 
\fB-i\fR <\fIignored servers\fR>
Specify a server or a comma-separated list of servers to be ignored in the analysis; this allows to exclude, for example,
the redirector.
.TP 
\fB-e\fR <\fIexcluded servers\fR>
Specify a server or a comma-separated list of servers to be excluded from the target servers; this can be used, for example,
to determine the files movements to drain a server.
.TP 
\fB--plot\fR [<\fIplot file\fR>]
Defines the file with the output plot with the original distribution with the server names and the +-10% limits;
the extension (if known) defines the format; the default format is 'png' and the default name 'plot.png'.
The plot can also be obtained directly from a binary output file (saved with '--outfile <outfile>.root') but
just specifying '--infile <outfile>.root --plot'

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
The following environment variables may be used to control the behaviour of
.B pq2
.TP 
PQ2DSSRVURL
Path to the dataset repository when working via a local or remote file system; the value specified here is
superseeded by '-u srvurl'; the path must contain the full directory spefication. To test the goodness of the
path run gSystem->AccessPathName("$PQ2DSSRVURL", kReadPermissions) in a ROOT shell: this command will return
0 is the path is good. The PQ2DSSRVURL settings are superseeded by '-u srvurl'. If not specified, PQ2DSSRVURL defaults
to PQ2PROOFURL (see below).
.TP 
PQ2PROOFURL
URL of the PROOF master connected to the dataset repository when working with PROOF server (i.e. the entry point of the
PROOF cluster). To test the goodness of the url try to pen a PROOF session in ROOT shell with
TProof::Open("$PQ2PROOFURL", "masteronly").
.TP 
PROOFURL
Same as PQ2PROOFURL but deprecated.
.TP 
DATASETCACHE
Controls the use of the cache when working via a remote file system; set to 'no' to disable the cache; by default
the cache is enabled.
.TP
DATASETLOCALCACHEDIR
Location of the local cache the default is a path derived from $PQ2DSSRVURL (replacemente of '/' and ':' with %) and
created under $TMPDIR, e.g. for PQ2DSSRVURL set to root://alicecaf.cern.ch:11094//dataset-xpd, the default cache
directory is /tmp/<user>/dataset.cache/root%%%alicecaf.cern.ch%11094%%dataset-xpd .
.TP
PQ2GROUP
Group to be used to initialize the dataset manager instance when working via a local or remote file system;
the default is an empty string, which results in 'default'.
.TP
PQ2USER
User to be used to initialize the dataset manager instance when working via a local or remote file system;
the default is an empty string, which results in 'username' running the 'pq2' instance.
.TP
PQ2DSMGROPTS
Options to be used in initializing the dataset manager; the default allows for browsing only, e.g. '-Ar:-Av:'
.TP
PQ2DSSRVACTS
List of operations to be done via the data server in the case both PQ2DSSRVURL and PQ2PROOFURL are specified.
By the default, the browsing actions (ls, ls-files, ls-files-server, info-server, ana-dist) are executed via
PQ2DSSRVURL, the others (put, rm, verify) via PQ2PROOFURL. This allows to speed-up the operations by using
caching and to reduce the load on the PROOF master.
.RS
The format is "<action-tag>:" where the action tags are:
.RE
.RS
.nf
              ls             for      ls
              lsfiles        for      ls-files
              filessrv       for      ls-files-server
              infosrv        for      info-server
              anadist        for      ana-dist
              cache          for      cache
              put            for      put
              rm             for      rm
              vfy            for      verify
.fi
.RE
.TP
TMPDIR
Directory used for temporary files or directories; the actual temporary directory is required to end witt the
username (in some cases TMPDIR already ends with the username).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIproof\fR(1), \fIpq2-ls\fR(1), \fIpq2-ls-files\fR(1), \fIpq2-ls-files-server\fR(1), \fIpq2-info-server\fR(1), \fIpq2-ana-dist\fR(1),
\fIpq2-put\fR(1), \fIpq2-verify\fR(1), \fIpq2-rm\fR(1), \fIpq2-cache\fR(1)
.PP
For more information on the \fBROOT\fR system, please refer to 
.UR http://root.cern.ch/
.I http://root.cern.ch
.UE
.SH "ORIGINAL AUTHORS"
Gerardo Ganis for the ROOT team.
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2.1 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.
.P
This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Lesser General Public License for more details.
.P
You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA
.SH AUTHOR 
This manual page was originally written by Gerardo Ganis <gerardo.ganis@cern.ch>, for ROOT version 5.
